Fine-Tuning a Pre-Trained Model for Sentiment Analysis in Azure AI Studio

1. Task Definition

1.1 Chosen AI Task: Sentiment Analysis of Product Reviews
The objective of this project is to fine-tune a pre-trained transformer model for sentiment analysis, using a custom dataset 
of product reviews. The fine-tuned model will be deployed on Azure Machine Learning as an inference API.

1.2 Importance of Fine-Tuning
Pre-trained models are trained on general datasets, but fine-tuning helps them adapt to specific domains. For instance:

E-commerce reviews often contain domain-specific language that a generic model may not understand.
Fine-tuning on a custom dataset enhances accuracy for this specific use case.

1.3 Expected Outcomes
A fine-tuned transformer model that classifies reviews as positive, negative, or neutral.
An API endpoint for real-time sentiment analysis.
Improved performance compared to an off-the-shelf model.

2. Dataset Insights

2.1 Dataset Collection
A dataset of 50,000 customer product reviews was collected from public e-commerce datasets.
Each review is labeled as positive (1), negative (0), or neutral (2).

2.2 Data Preprocessing
Text Cleaning: Removed special characters, URLs, and excessive spaces.
Normalization: Converted text to lowercase and removed stop words.
Tokenization: Used distilbert-base-uncased tokenizer to convert text into tokenized format.
Dataset Splitting:

Train Set: 80% (40,000 reviews)
Validation Set: 10% (5,000 reviews)
Test Set: 10% (5,000 reviews)

2.3 Uploading to Azure
The dataset was uploaded to Azure Blob Storage.
Azure Dataset Manager was used for tracking dataset versions.

3. Model Training Summary

3.1 Model Selection
Pre-trained Model: distilbert-base-uncased-finetuned-sst-2-english (Hugging Face)
Reason for Selection: Lightweight and efficient for sentiment classification.

3.2 Fine-Tuning Process
Batch Size: 16
Learning Rate: 2e-5
Epochs: 3
Optimizer: AdamW
Loss Function: Cross-entropy loss
Frameworks Used: Hugging Face Transformers, PyTorch, and Azure ML

3.3 Optimizing Training with Azure
DeepSpeed & ONNX Runtime: Enabled for accelerated training.
Azure ML Metrics Dashboard: Used for real-time monitoring of training loss and accuracy.

4. Model Evaluation

4.1 Performance Metrics
Accuracy: 93.2%
F1-Score: 92.5%
Precision-Recall Tradeoff: Balanced to reduce false positives and false negatives.
Error Analysis:
The model occasionally misclassified sarcastic reviews.
Short reviews were harder to classify accurately.

5. Deployment on Azure Machine Learning

5.1 API Endpoint Setup
The fine-tuned model was registered in Azure AI Studio.
A real-time inference endpoint was created using Azure ML Managed Online Deployment.

5.2 Integration and Testing
Tested the API with unseen product reviews.
Example API Call:
in json
{
  "text": "This product is amazing! It exceeded my expectations."
}
Response:
in json
{"prediction": "positive"}

5.3 Real-Time Monitoring
Azure Application Insights was used to track model latency and API usage.
The model auto-scales based on traffic volume.

6. Future Improvements

6.1 Advanced Fine-Tuning
Fine-tune using larger, domain-specific datasets.
Train on multilingual datasets for broader applicability.

6.2 Enhanced Sentiment Categories
Introduce more sentiment levels:
Very positive
Slightly positive
Neutral
Slightly negative
Very negative

6.3 Real-Time Feedback Loop
Implement human feedback to correct misclassifications over time.
Train the model using reinforcement learning from user inputs.
7. Conclusion
This project successfully fine-tuned a pre-trained transformer model for sentiment analysis, improving performance on e-commerce 
product reviews. The model was deployed as a real-time API on Azure, and its performance was monitored using Azure ML. Future 
improvements will focus on expanding sentiment categories and improving multilingual capabilities.

